In Q3 2016, we detected moderate
evidence of overheating. The
seasonally adjusted sales-to-new
listings ratio was 75 per cent, similar
to the reading in the second quarter.
This was the third consecutive
quarter that the ratio was above our
threshold of 70 per cent, continuing
the classification of a moderate
problematic condition.
The stable sales-to-new listings ratio
was the result of the number of
new listings keeping pace with the
growth in sales in Q3. There was a
3.3 per cent increase in the seasonally
adjusted number of MLS® new listings
in the resale market, while the
corresponding number of MLS® sales
grew by 3.7 per cent. The increase
in the flow of supply in the third
quarter prevented this measure of
the market from moving further
above its threshold. Even though the
number of new listings moved closer
to its five-year average, the number of
sales remain well above its historical
average, thus continued evidence of
overheating remained.
Judging by recent data from
November 2016, the sales-tonew listings ratio has sustained its
high level, but produced notable
differences by dwelling type. As noted
in the previous report, the market
is now tighter for condominium
apartments than for single-detached
homes (see Table 1). The market
for condominium apartments
experienced a surge in demand this
year, as rapid price increases and low
inventory of low-rise homes have
likely pushed many buyers into the
relatively affordable condominium
market. Markets were also
tighter in areas that offered more
affordable low-rise options, such
as Halton Region.
We detected moderate evidence of
price acceleration in Q3 2016. The
MLS® average house price grew by
a seasonally adjusted 3.8 per cent in
Q3 2016 from the previous quarter.
Prices grew at a more pronounced
rate of 18.3 per cent on a year-overyear basis. Due to a high number of
sales and a relatively stable number of
new listings over the past year, there
were more buyers chasing the same
number of listings, which resulted in
sale prices often exceeding list prices.
Price growth continued to differ
across housing types in the GTA
with single-detached homes posting
the highest growth rates due to
lower supply levels. The seasonally
adjusted median price of a singledetached home and condominium
apartment climbed 4.9 per cent
and 3.2 per cent from the previous
quarter, respectively. As the sales-tonew listings ratio for condominium
apartments has climbed in recent
months, their inventories have also
declined, and price growth has
picked up.
Annualized price growth was strong
across the GTA, but did show some
significant differences across submarkets. For the most part, home
price growth was strongest in
suburban areas, such as in Durham,
Halton and York Regions where the
market has been the tightest over the
past year (see Figure 3). Sales in these
regions were also skewed towards
low-rise housing, which helped push
up the average price. However, due to
a tightening condominium apartment
market, the City of Toronto’s price
growth has begun to close the gap
with the suburbs.
The average price grew at a slightly
higher rate than the median price
over the last year, which suggests
price growth is rising relatively faster
in the high-end segments. By price
range, there has been a significant
increase in the number of homes
selling for over $1 million. Price
growth has now pushed the yearto-date share of homes selling over
this mark to 17.1% in 2016, up from
10.8% in 2015. Almost all of the
growth in the number of homes sold
over $1 million were single-detached
homes. As of November, 31.9% of
single-detached homes sold in 2016
were over the $1 million mark. We detected strong evidence of
overvaluation in Q3 2016, driven
by strong house price growth that
outpaced economic and demographic
fundamentals. The gap between actual
home prices and prices supported by
these fundamental drivers has now
been above its problematic threshold
for seven consecutive quarters.
The average price of a house in the
GTA grew by a seasonally adjusted
3.8 per cent in Q3 2016, compared
to the previous quarter. At the same
time, disposable income declined by
0.5 per cent, and the young adult
population grew by 2.0 per cent.
Since these fundamental drivers in
our house price models could not
account for current price levels,
imbalances continue to persist.
To some degree price growth is
justified, as there has been growth
in certain fundamentals. Population
and full time employment increases
for those aged between 25 and
44 years has been supportive,
although this has started to moderate
in recent quarters. Additionally, low
mortgage rates have offset some of
the current price growth by keeping
mortgage carrying costs relatively
stable, which has also resulted in
increased household borrowing for
home purchases.
Overbuilding
We detected weak evidence of
overbuilding in Q3 2016. The
third quarter saw the total
number of completed and unsold
units decline significantly to
1,253 units, which was the result
of an increase in absorptions of
apartment units. This represented
2.1 units per 10,000 population, and
was now well below the threshold
for evidence of overbuilding in
the Toronto CMA of 4.2 units
per 10,000 population. Our measure
of overbuilding has declined steadily
since the end of 2015, as some
builders have limited launches and
channeled demand into existing
inventories. Many buyers have also
shifted demand into the relatively
more affordable condominium
apartment market, which contained
most of the build-up in inventory.
It is worth noting that the number
of homes under construction
in November 2016 was 68,616,
roughly two-thirds of which are
condominium apartments. This high
number of condominium apartment
units under construction points to
robust completions over the near
future, which will add to supply
(in terms of both new listings and
unsold units). Given these levels,
inventory management among
builders continues to be necessary
to make sure that units currently
under construction are absorbed
upon completion.
The vacancy rate, which is updated
every October through CMHC’s
Rental Market Survey, is also used
to asses overbuilding. In October
2016, it declined to 1.3 per cent,
compared to 1.6 per cent in the
previous year (Figure 5). This measure
evaluates the extent to which
there is unused capacity among the
available rental supply. This year’s
decline shows strong demand for
rental accommodations. The growth in the mortgage carrying cost of
the average home outpaced the
increase in average rent in 2016.
This led many households to decide
to continue renting as shown by
tightening vacancy rates across all
apartment types. 